Add PBS hooks for automatic power capping (#2960)
geopm/geopm: service/integration/open_pbs/README.rst

geopm_open_pbs_power_limit(7) -- OpenPBS hooks for providing job-level power limits
===================================================================================

Overview
--------

The GEOPM OpenPBS power limit hook extends OpenPBS's functionality to allow
the user to request a job-level power limit through a ``geopm-job-power-limit``

> resource at the time of job submission, and to enforce cluster-level power

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resource at the time of job submission and to enforce cluster-level power
```

limits through that mechanism. Via a command-line option, the user can specify
a per-node power limit through a ``geopm-node-power-limit`` resource to be
applied to every node that is part of the job. The power limit is applied just

> before the job runs, as part of the job's prologue, and is restored upon job

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before the job runs as part of the job's prologue, and it is restored upon job
```

> completion, as part of the job's epilogue. The scheduler can be configured

Reviewer: ```suggestion
completion as part of the job's epilogue. The scheduler can be configured
```

with constraints over those power limits across a cluster in order to enforce a
cluster power limit. The GEOPM OpenPBS hook enables automatic configuration of
job power limits to increase utilization of the available cluster power.

.. image:: geopm_power_resources.svg
     :width: 600
     :alt: Block diagram of the relationship between geopm node and job power resources

Save-restore Mechanism
----------------------
The hook keeps track of the original power limit setting and restores it at
the end of the job (for each node that's part of the job). To achieve this,
the hook needs to be configured to run during the job prologue and epilogue

> events (see the Installation section for more details).

Reviewer: Below:

`If the job is unexpectedly interrupted before the hook is able to restore the power limit setting, the power limit will be rectified the next time the hook is triggered on affected nodes. To accomplish this, the hook saves the original setting to a file before applying any changes. Typically, the hook will access the stored setting for the restore operation during the epilogue. During the prologue of a new job, if a new power limit is not requested and a save file is present, the hook will restore the saved power limit so that the new job is not affected by prior power limit settings.`

Question: Is the save file deleted following a successful restore? Might be worth stating explicitly if so

Author: It is. I'll add a note.

flexibility when the cluster is power constrained. If the cluster power cap is
sufficiently low, then jobs may not begin executing even when sufficient
non-power resources are available on idle nodes. At a high level,
this automatic limiter attempts to set the lowest acceptable power cap to
each job (based on modeled power-performance relationships and a desired
slowdown limit) until the scheduler offers to allocate resources to a job. When
the scheduler offers to start the job, the automatic limiter opportunistically
increases power to that job if there is additional unallocated power available
in the cluster.

Automatic power limits are selected through handlers for ``queuejob`` and
``runjob`` PBS events. The ``queuejob`` event handler initially sets the
``geopm-job-power-limit`` of each submitted job to be the lowest tolerable
power limit for that job, according to the configured maximum job slowdown and
the job's selected power-performance model. Once the PBS
scheduler has determined that there are sufficient resources (power and
otherwise) to execute the job, the ``runjob`` event handler is triggered. That

> event handler opportunistically increases the power limit for that job, up to

Reviewer 2: Would the runjob event handler ever reduce the power limit back down to the original lower bound to make space for a new job?

Author: This is an escaped part of documentation from my latest updates, so I'll remove that note. The rest of this comment is just additional context.

I originally implemented the capability described here but I removed it after realizing that it does not play nice with backfilling. As far as I can tell, it doesn't cause any constraint violations, but it would potentially cause a candidate fill job to lose its backfill spot in the schedule, which breaks a key motivation to get users to opt in to do this.

Example scenario: There is a power-and-time hole in the schedule, which can be assigned to a particular fill job that was assigned a low power cap on queue entry. Now that it is identified as a viable fill job, we execute the runjob event handler, which increases the power assigned to this job to use whatever slack power **currently** exists. But even if there is currently sufficient power, that may not be true for all times between now and the job's time limit. The scheduler will re-evaluate viability of this job after changing the job's resource requirements. If the increased power cap causes an expected delay for the top job, then this job will no longer be used as a fill job.

I think we could avoid that problem if it was possible to ask the scheduler whether the resource change would make us lose our spot, but I haven't figured out a way to do that. So this implementation just keeps the initial cap set by queuejob.

the configured maximum power per node (times the number of nodes in the job),
bound by the amount of power that is still unallocated in the cluster.

Both the ``queuejob`` and ``runjob`` event handlers reconcile differences
between the automatically configured ``geopm-job-power-limit`` and the
user-selectable ``geopm-node-power-limit``. In the event that both limits are

> specified, the greater of the two is applied. For example, in a 2-node job with

Reviewer 2: pehaps provide a justification for using the greater of the two rather than the lesser of the two?

results in 50% slowdown).

An administrator can also configure polynomial power-performance models for
individual *job classes* or for *compute nodes*. In both cases, the models are
configured in terms of coefficients in the following relationship between $S$
slowdown and $P$ power cap:

$S(P) = (A (x0 - P / P_{max})^2 + B (x0 - P / P_{max}) + C)$

Each performance model maps to a *profile* name, optionally also to one or
more *host* names within the profile. Models that have a profile but not a host
are used to relate user-requested slowdown to job power caps. Models that have
both a profile and a host are used to non-uniformly distribute a job power cap
across nodes assigned to the job.

Each host or profile model is defined in a *model* attribute that contains
members for the model coefficients ``x0``, ``A``, ``B``, and ``C``. The root
level of the configuration file also has a ``max_power`` value that maps to
$P_{max}$. The following example configuration file defines coefficients for
job classes named ``jobtype_a`` and ``jobtype_b``, and defines per-host models
under a profile named ``node-characterization``:

> .. code-block::

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we can reference a schema here?

To ensure that the job power limit is treated as a consumable resource by the
PBS scheduler, the resource must also be declared in the scheduler's
configuration file (located at ``$PBS_HOME/sched_priv/sched_config``). That is,
the line beginning with ``resources:`` should include an entry for
``geopm-job-power-limit``. The other resources mentioned in this guide do not
need to be added to that configuration file. For example, the following
commands add the GEOPM resource to an existing scheduler configuration:

::

    source /etc/pbs.conf
    sed -i -e 's/^resources: "\([^"]\+\)"$/resources: "\1, geopm-job-power-limit"/g' "${PBS_HOME}/sched_priv/sched_config"

Restart the PBS scheduler for the configuration changes to take effect. For
example, one way is to use systemctl or run ``/etc/init.d/pbs restart`` where
the PBS scheduler is running.

The hook to enforce node power caps is available in the GEOPM
``service/integration/open_pbs`` directory (``geopm_power_limit.py``) and
can be installed with the following commands:

::

   qmgr -c "create hook geopm_power_limit"
   qmgr -c "import hook geopm_power_limit application/x-python default geopm_power_limit.py"

>    qmgr -c "set hook geopm_power_limit event='execjob_prologue,execjob_epilogue,queuejob'"

Reviewer 3: runjob seems to be missing

Author: It's erroneously mentioned in other parts of the docs. I'll remove those references from the upcoming revision.

take the opportunity to restore the power limit setting during the prologue so
the new job is not affected by a prior power limit setting.

Automatic Power Limits
----------------------
The goal of the automatic power limiter is to provide additional scheduling
flexibility when the cluster is power constrained. If the cluster power cap is
sufficiently low, then jobs may not begin executing even when sufficient

> non-power resources are available on idle nodes. The high-level approach of
> this automatic limiter is to initially set the lowest acceptable power cap to
> each job (based on modeled power-performance relationships and a desired
> slowdown limit) until the scheduler offers to allocate resources to a job. When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
non-power resources are available on idle nodes. At a high level,
this automatic limiter attempts to set the lowest acceptable power cap to
each job (based on modeled power-performance relationships and a desired
slowdown limit) until the scheduler offers to allocate resources to a job. When
```

the scheduler offers to start the job, the automatic limiter opportunistically
increases power to that job if there is additional unallocated power available
in the cluster.

Automatic power limits are selected through handlers for ``queuejob`` and
``runjob`` PBS events. The ``queuejob`` event handler initially sets the
``geopm-job-power-limit`` of each submitted job to be the lowest tolerable
power limit for that job, according to the configured maximum job slowdown and

> according to that job's selected power-performance model. Once the PBS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the job's selected power-performance model. Once the PBS
```

scheduler has determined that there are sufficient resources (power and
otherwise) to execute the job, the ``runjob`` event handler is triggered. That
event handler opportunistically increases the power limit for that job, up to
the configured maximum power per node (times the number of nodes in the job),
bound by the amount of power that is still unallocated in the cluster.

Both the ``queuejob`` and ``runjob`` event handlers reconcile differences
between the automatically configured ``geopm-job-power-limit`` and the

> user-selectable ``geopm-node-power-limit``. In the even that both limits are

Author: ```suggestion
user-selectable ``geopm-node-power-limit``. In the event that both limits are
```

  ``MSR::PLATFORM_ENERGY_STATUS`` MSRs.

Installation
------------
Prior to being able to use the power limit feature, the
``geopm-node-power-limit`` and ``geopm-job-power-limit`` resources and the
power limit hook need to be installed on the OpenPBS server.

The resources can be created with the following commands:

::

   qmgr -c "create resource geopm-node-power-limit type=float"
   qmgr -c "create resource geopm-job-power-limit type=float,flag=q"
   qmgr -c "create resource geopm-max-slowdown type=float"
   qmgr -c "create resource geopm-job-type type=string"

**TODO:** Need to verify the ``geopm-max-slowdown`` and ``geopm-job-type``
definitions on the test server.

To ensure that the job power limit is treated as a consumable resource by the
PBS scheduler, the resource must also be declared in the scheduler's
configuration file (located at ``$PBS_HOME/sched_priv/sched_config``). That is,
the line beginning with ``resources:`` should include an entry for
``geopm-job-power-limit``. The other resources mentioned in this guide do not
need to be added to that configuration file.

The hook to enforce node power caps is available in the GEOPM

> ``service/integration/open_pbs`` directory (``geopm_power_limit.py``) and it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``service/integration/open_pbs`` directory (``geopm_power_limit.py``) and
```

can be installed with the following commands:

::

   qmgr -c "create hook geopm_power_limit"
   qmgr -c "import hook geopm_power_limit application/x-python default geopm_power_limit.py"
   qmgr -c "set hook geopm_power_limit event='execjob_prologue,execjob_epilogue,queuejob,runjob'"

> Note how the hook needs to be configured to run in three events: job
> prologue, job epilogue, and runjob.

Author: ```suggestion
Note how the hook needs to be configured to run in four events: job
prologue, job epilogue, queuejob, and runjob.
```
